Tobias Wolfe.
This is a wonderful new collection.
Oh, I'm glad you like it.
Congratulations.
And it is 15 years between story collections, isn't it?
Are there abouts?
About 10.
Is it 10?
Yeah.
Wait a minute.
11.
It was the fall of 85 when Back in the World came out.
Okay.
Exactly 11 years.
So what does this say?
Or does it say anything?
Well, I have never stopped working on stories.
I love stories.
They're...
You know, when a story comes upon me, I can't resist it.
I have to write it.
So in the time that I was writing my last two books, This Boy's Life and In Pharaoh's Army, I would leave off from Tysaton to write a story that demanded to be written.
So something would start...
Some notion would start growing in me and distracting me from the work at hand, and then I'd leave off for a little while and write it.
In that way, I wrote many stories over the last ten years, probably about half of which appear in this volume.
The other half I wasn't really...
All that, you know, just because you feel like you have to write a story doesn't mean it's going to be good when you finish it.
That's a great line.
But I like these stories, and they seem to me to fit comfortably together.
So that is the... What argues for them to fit comfortably together?
Maybe that's not phrased.
It's an instinct of my own, in a sense that I guess maybe I could describe it this way.
I can imagine all these people...
inhabiting the same world, I can imagine all these people crossing paths at one time or another, though they don't in the book.
That there's some plane of existence that they all share.
It isn't a question of there being a single kind of...
moral or spiritual issue behind each of the stories, the way, say, is the case in Flannery O'Connor.
I think of it more, I guess, like Dubliners, which has a sense of people sharing a kind of common ground of existence.
And that is how I think of the stories in this collection and the people in the stories.
You know, you told me when I was out there for the PW interview that you were very briefly a reporter and that you were a failure as a reporter.
Yeah, I wasn't a good one.
And I'm wondering if the opening story here kind of draws on that.
It does.
Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely, it certainly does.
Yes, I was...
Obviously, I have elaborated somewhat on the incident that impelled the story in the first place, but I brooded over it for years.
I did, in fact, write an obituary of a man who was not dead.
I got into trouble for it because we were supposed to go through certain steps when we got a report of a death, and I didn't follow them.
I just took that. I just took the obituary base, you know the information from the people, who just trying. I know the truth. Uh the paper ran and then they were very cross about the whole thing as you can imagine, but it didn't follow the liniments of the you know the. No it's but is that almost the kind of a uh a newsroom uh apocryphal story, I wonder about? I'm not going to give it away in any way because it's
It caught me.
I mean, it almost hits him like an insight.
It may have happened to others, but it certainly happened.
I remember a guy called in his own obit, I guess, is the thing.
To tell you the truth, I always suspected that other reporters did it as a joke.
A joke.
I mean, a guy really could get fired from that.
I know.
It's a good story.
The only thing that I...
Yeah, that's right, exactly.
But anyway, one thing I do like about it, and it seems to be consistent with all the stories, is that there are these epiphanous moments, you know, these flashes of insight, which you really have to, you know, think of when you're writing a story, I could imagine.
There's not this leisure time available to develop these... Are these moments kind of in view when you're writing these stories, or do they more or less...
Well, by the time I come to write the last draft of the story, everything is pretty much in view.
But it isn't always the case that I'm aware when I begin writing a story, just exactly where it's going to go.
It will often just be set in motion by... well, by very different things.
One is the...
The most recent story I've written, which is not in the collection, it was actually started in motion by a dream I had.
That I rarely do.
I know a lot of writers very much depend on their dreams, like Paul Bowles does.
That hasn't been something that's figured largely in my work, but in this last story it did.
Sometimes I'll start from something that's very close to my own experience.
Sometimes I'll start from something I've heard.
that for some reason or other I can't let go of.
I just worry at it.
It works on me.
And then finally I have put down whatever else I'm doing and I start writing it.
And I'm not always sure where it's going to lead.
And indeed, if I do know where it's going to lead, it actually goes there.
It's usually not a very good story when I finish it.
That's almost surely a sign to me that it's not going to be a good story, that everything goes according to plan.
Yeah.
In that first draft, I really, in my own case, I'm not sure this is true for other writers, but it is certainly true for me.
I almost need for the story to surprise me in the writing.
Otherwise, it just doesn't have that freshness that I'm looking for.
Paul Stevens once said, no surprise for the writer, no surprise for the reader.
I believe that.
That has certainly been borne out in my own experience.
I write with a wide open... I mean, it's kind of terrifying because it's obviously much more reassuring to a writer to feel... for writers to feel that they know where they're going when they're writing, know exactly where they're going.
On the other hand, I think that you close yourself off from all kinds of possibilities when you write in that frame of mind.
Now, when I've put a story through several drafts, then by the time, obviously, I'm starting at the beginning and I'm going to go all the way through to the end, then for the last time I know pretty much why every comma is going where it is.
But not when I first start writing a story.
It's pretty exciting, isn't it, that stories as a form remain vibrant at this point?
It sure is for me.
I don't know whether that's true...
in the world at large.
I think there's a hard core of aficionados out there and a very loyal constituency.
The short story has a very loyal constituency.
But it's not a large one, I think.
That's my sense.
I know publishers are always telling me how miserable they are when they see a short story coming.
I mean, not my publisher, but I...
I know that when young writers of my acquaintance are writing short stories and submit a collection to a publisher, they almost always ask if they can not have a novel first to publish and to bring the stories out on the back of it, which indicates to me that my enthusiasm and my excitement about the short story is not necessarily shared by the public at large.
So what?
I mean, that's been true of poetry for hundreds of years.
Well, even more so, my interview for this week is with Neil Simon.
I said, what do you tell young playwrights?
Wow.
He said, what I tell him is don't do it.
He told me a cute story.
This is Neil Simon.
He thought he'd like to teach a course for a year, and he called Stanford University because he's living out in L.A.
and it's close.
And he said, would you be interested in my teaching a course in playwriting?
They said, wow, they'd be overwhelmed.
And he said, just out of curiosity, how many people do you think would take it?
They called back three days later.
They said, we can get five students.
And he said, what if it's screenwriting?
He said, oh, 200.
They said 200.
You know, everybody wants to go into screenwriting now, but the point is, you know, who is writing plays?
And, of course, when you think about how difficult it is to stage one, you know, I mean, why bother at that point?
Well, and also the prevailing fashion in plays.
So, you know, it's all these revivals.
It's...
rather crass, epic-scale musicals, the dramatic, so to speak, literary play as a vanishing species.
Really?
Yeah.
Now, I asked him, you know, because it is pertinent in his case, because he's written for television, he's written for the movies, and he writes plays.
And I asked him when he writes, and I think it's pertinent to the discussion you and I have just had, do you see your audience?
Do you have an image of the person who you're writing for?
So for TV, I don't have a clue.
He said, it's 22 million sitting in the garage drinking beer, for all I know.
The Maurice comes down a little bit more.
He said, well, when it comes to a play, I'm thinking of about 1,000 very intelligent people on Broadway.
And it's a tough audience, and I'm writing for them.
I wonder if that applies when you mentioned that there is kind of a hardcore readership for stories.
Are you thinking of the reader when you're writing these stories?
I'm thinking of...
To tell you the truth, the reader I'm thinking of is myself.
I have no idea how someone else reads.
So what I have to ask is, would I like this story, would I like this sentence if I read it?
Obviously, there's a gamble inherent in that kind of a question because you're perhaps more inclined to like your work than someone else might be.
But on the other hand, how could I ask that question from someone else's point of view?
I'm a very demanding reader.
I'm also a reader who takes delight in the short story.
And I wouldn't want to write for anyone less demanding than I am.
I wouldn't want to write down to people.
And I don't know how to write to someone more intelligent than me because I'm not more intelligent than me.
Do you know what I mean?
Of course.
How can I imagine somebody who's more demanding and more intelligent?
It's just that it isn't egomaniac.
It's simply that my imagination and my intelligence
basically sealing out at my level.
And so I try to write at the highest level that I am capable of.
You know, I mean, I've asked this question of, say, Marilyn French.
Well, she knows who she's writing for.
You know, she can almost visualize her reader.
Mary Carr, you know, your friend, can almost visualize her reader for that wonderful book of hers.
Lovely book.
Nice woman, I have to say.
I guess, you know, we call them stories.
It is storytelling, isn't it?
Maybe you could just muse briefly on the craft of, on the art of storytelling.
I guess undoubtedly it does retain its vibrancy, you know, as we approach the end of this millennium.
I mean, it is a timeless thing, isn't it?
Storytelling.
Yeah, absolutely.
I think...
at its root.
That's what writing is, isn't it, I guess?
Absolutely, yeah.
It's certainly how it started.
It's one of the most natural things to us to tell stories, and it's the sign of health in a person to me that they tell stories.
It's a sign of their interest in the world and the peculiarities of their fellow humans and
in a way of understanding what goes on between people is in story.
It's the pleasure in the actual as opposed to the abstract.
What really goes on between folk?
And how does this web of circumstance we find ourselves in come to mean something?
That's the other thing story does.
Just being on...
What the story does in just our day-to-day life is give us a way of organizing experience so that it has meaning and coherence for us.
And the literary story, I think, does that even more.
It takes it out of the realm of anecdote, which is where most of our spoken stories lie.
in which to simply recount the events and the amusing shape of events or the interesting shape of an event is sufficient, but to really plumb a pattern of experience, a pattern of behavior and, you know, again, what goes on between people for all that it can yield in the way of meaning and poetry, you know, what kind of
what the best language is that can be brought to bear to express that circumstance and those personalities.
Then you have a, you know, you've moved the story on to another level.
And, of course, that's my concern in this book, and it's the concern of the short story writer to do that.
There does seem to be a moral center to all of the stories.
Do you agree with that, number one?
And number two, is that an essential element for you in writing these stories, or any story?
Well, I can't imagine not doing it.
I mean, that is so true for me, that
It isn't really that I even think about it that much when I'm doing it.
It's natural.
It is what we all do all the time is try to figure out the best course of the many that are at any given moment open to us.
We find ourselves always in a web of community.
We find ourselves in a web of friendship, family, community.
We find ourselves connected and responsible.
And the moral sense is what suggests to us the best way to honor those connections in completely imperfect circumstances where no matter what you do, something is not going to be as it should.
I mean, complete fulfillment of all responsibilities simultaneously is impossible.
So there's always...
a kind of triage going on in one's moral life.
And not to reckon that as part of, you know, as it's constantly going on in our own lives, for that not to find its way into one's fiction would seem odd to me.
It would be to exclude what is at the heart of so much of what we do and what we think about.
So it isn't necessarily that I set out to write a moral story, but I guess that consciousness of what goes on in us all the time inevitably finds its way into the stories.
Does this collection reflect where you are in your life professionally?
Professionally?
Yeah.
What do you mean?
Well, looking at your body of work, say, as a corpus, and you've done these two wonderful memoirs, you are back now in the form that...
that everybody knows you.
Well, I guess most readers know you probably for your memoirs, but truly you are one of our great story writers.
I'm just wondering, I guess, in terms of development, progression, you know, where you are with you.
Well, I think the best of this, I mean, I hope that the best of the stories in this book are my best stories.
One always hopes that, that the most recent work somehow represents you at your best and shows you...
as having grown since your last book.
And I'm very happy with the stories in this book.
But they don't represent a resting place for me.
I'm thinking now about a much longer project that I have had in mind for years, and that will be the next thing I do.
And I will no doubt continue to write stories
over the years as I do this other project, as I did during the writing of the last two books.
But, I mean, Graham Greene is my model in this.
Oh, great.
He continued to write short stories as he was writing his novels.
And, you know, between novels and even while he was working on novels.
And they're good stories.
In fact, they're wonderful stories, Graham Greene's stories.
And...
And I would hope to be able to continue to do that myself.
Well, you mentioned a longer project.
Are we talking about a novel?
Yes.
It's a work in progress?
It is.
I'm being very vague here.
You could say that it's a work in progress.
And you're excited about it?
Yes, I am.
Good.
Any projections as to when we might?
No.
That's good.
So there's no pressure on yourself?
No, no, no.
And then briefly, not only selecting the stories, but organizing them.
There is a unity to them, I can see.
Is that something you do or that you do with Gary or you work on it collaboratively or what?
You mean the order?
Yeah, the order.
Yeah.
Well, that's funny.
I mean, Gary and I laugh about this.
I sent in my stories in a certain order that I thought worked well.
He made a couple of suggestions to me that I thought were good, and we changed the order of a few of the stories.
By and large, he thought that my ordering of them made sense and gave a good emotional pacing to the work.
And you think a lot about the order.
As I was saying, you want to imagine these people inhabiting some kind of common ground, and
And the sense of their lives being revealed, you want that to have an almost dramatic pace, as it would in a novel.
And you want the stories to kind of talk to each other and play off against each other in a certain way.
So it's very important.
But having said that, I also know that readers generally...
don't respect the order of a short story collection.
And I say this because I don't myself do that.
I'm terrible.
When I pick up a short story collection, even knowing what I go through to order it, when I do my first reading of a collection of stories, I'll generally turn to one of the shorter stories.
Just, you know, if it's not a writer I know well.
And just see whether I like it.
To get a fast taste.
Get a taste of it.
And a title will catch my interest.
I'll say, God, that's a really interesting title.
I wonder why he called it that.
I wonder why she called it that.
Let me take a look at that story.
And I mean, eventually I'll read, if I like the collection, I'll read it through from beginning to end.
But when I'm doing my first path through a short story collection, I tend to skip around a lot and frustrate, therefore, the design of the writer.
I mean, I guess it's a little like
I don't do this, but people who read crime novels reading the last chapters before, you know, I can't imagine.
Oh, why bother at that point?
Why waste your time at that point?
Exactly, exactly.
But it's a little different with a short story collection because you still have to...
But in putting it together, even though in this case there are 15 stories, you do want a unity.
I think you do want a beginning, a middle, and an ending.
You want a feeling of coherence, of an experience.
And if you've done it right, you want the reader to walk away with that attitude.
I think that I've questioned you about your whole life and a previous encounter, and I have that, and so I'll feel free to draw on some of that stuff for this piece.
So there's really no need to put you through an hour of this.
I love the collection.
I'm sorry we didn't get a chance to meet on this.
Did you come to Boston by chance?
I think maybe you were coming.
I'm going to be there reading at the public library on the 23rd.
Yeah, I'm going to be someplace.
I'm going to be in Washington that day, as a matter of fact.
So I'm sorry I won't be able to see you.
I'll have this piece out by then.
Oh, great.
And if you'd like, give me your office address or whatever.
I'll just give you my home address.
Okay.
214.
Scott Avenue, Syracuse 13224.
Okay.
And do you mind?
Because, you know, I've neglected to have you inscribe a book the last couple of times.
If I send you a couple of books with an envelope to send it back in, would you mind doing that?
Absolutely.
I'd really have to have a couple of Toby Wilson.
I look forward to meeting you with you again, and congratulations.
Congratulations to you, Nick, on your book.
That's great news.
Thanks.
Great talking to you.
Bye-bye.